---
title: "Installing"
toc: TRUE
toc_float: TRUE
header:
  image: /assets/images/jekyll-og.png
  image_description: "Jekyll Logo"
  caption: "Jekyll [**Jekyll**](https://jekyllrb.com/)"
---
*How to install Ruby, Jekyll und Github Pages?*
<!--more-->

Now that you know, what is meant by saying Gem, GitHub or Ruby, we can start to install them and launch our very first page.

## Prerequisites
If you do not have a GitHub account by now, this would be the right time to <a href="https://github.com/join" target="_blank">create</a> one or if you have, to <a href="https://github.com/login" target="_blank">sign in</a>.

Then, we are going to

1. Install the latest version of the **Ruby+Devkit x.x.x-x (x64)** on [rubyinstaller.org](https://rubyinstaller.org/downloads/){:target="_blank"}.
* Restart the computer afterwards, just to make sure, especially if you are under Windows.

2.	Install bundler from terminal (for Windows type 'cmd' in your Windows Search Bar) and type `gem install bundler`
*	The path does not matter where you execute it
*	Close and restart the terminal to update the PATH Variables (otherwise the gem function is not available). If this does not work, restart the computer, especially if you are under Windows.

3.	Check if you have all other prerequisites installed (if any), go to [jekyllrb.com](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/){:target="_blank"}.

4.	Get a **docs** folder in your GitHub repository, which follows the required Jekyll structure *(assets, _data, _includes, _pages, etc.)*
*	Check for structure details on [jekyllrb.com/structure](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/structure/){:target="_blank"}.
*	You can also use a template like the [GeoMOER module template](https://github.com/GeoMOER/moer-html-module-template){:target="_blank"}.

5.	Run `bundle install` in this **docs** folder (switch to `/docs` folder before in the terminal) for installing the required gems for your webpage.
*	the gems will be installed in your local repository folder. If you want, and often you should want, exclude them from synchronizing with GitHub by adding the *.bundle* or *vendor* folders to your *.gitignore* file

## Serve the page
### Locally
Run `bundle exec jekyll serve` (switch to `/docs` folder before in the terminal).
*	If you received no errors you can open the page in a browser following the address given in the terminal, something like *Server address: http://127.0.0.1:4000/my-great-page/*.
*	If this worked you can proceed with serving the page on GitHub.

### On Github
*	Push your local changes to GitHub (if any).
*	Use your browser and navigate to the settings of your GitHub repo and turn on *GitHub Pages* under *pages* on the left. Therefore, select the master branch as source and */docs* as folder.
*	The url for your GitHub page can also be found there.
*	Note that pushed changed will take a while to be processed by GitHub and will not instantly be available globally. This might take 1-5 minutes.

## Important files and folders for your page
### Files
#### _config.yml
The most important file for your webpage. If you change something there, you need to build the site again with `bundle exec jekyll serve` for changes to take effect.

In this file, you set e.g.
*	the url for your page. If this url is wrong, everything will become a mess. If you serve your page on github, include the GitHub url here.
*	collections_dir: directory in /docs where Jekyll looks for pages to display.
*	:collections and :defaults - set the structure of your page. Make your collection content appear there, otherwiese they will not be displayed in the page.

#### index.md
Creates the front page. This page usually contains on top a teaser image with a description and a button and some text or feature rows below.

#### Gemfile
The gems, which will be used (and installed with `bundle install`) for your site. Add more gems if needed.

#### Gemfile.lock
If you want to fix a certain combination of Gems and versions thereof, use this file. It assures (hopefully) that the page can be served independent of the local gem installation.

### Folders

#### assets
Your media content for the page lives here (images, pdfs, videos, etc.)

#### _data
Important things for controlling your page live here, e.g.
*	*navigation.yml*: Can control the navigation for your page.
*	*main*: navigation on the top of the page
*	*docs*: navigation on the left of the page

#### _includes
Files controlling how to include contents live here, e.g.
*	*masthead.html*: controlls the appearance of the navigation panel on the top.

#### _pages
Files, which are directly rendered to HTML and included somewhere in your page live here. Those pages will be directly included in the url of your page after the baseurl.

#### _site
This is the folder where the compiled HTML files of your page live. In fact, this folder **is** the webpage, which will be displayed correctly if you set your paths and urls right (e.g. in the *_config.yml* file).

#### units
This is the folder for the collections. The collections are defined in the *_config.yml* file. All files in folders in this folder will be compiled as content in the navigation of the collections of your page. This folder is called "units" here because of the background in teaching at the Lab of Environmental Informatics.

Note that only folders will be displayed, which are refered to in the *_config.yml* file. Note also that the alphabetical order of the files and folders equals the order of appearance of content in the webpage. You can change this order in the *_config.yml* file (good luck).

### Notes
*	*md.* files are compiles by Jekyll to HTML for display in the webpage
*	For local serving: if you change files (and save them), the changes will directly be processed for updating the page. Do not forget to refresh the page in your browser for seeing the changes.

### Other
GitHub Pages mit Jekyll on Windows
*	Deinstall older rubygem installations (if no longer needed for other stuff)
*	Install [rubygems3.0 + devkit](https://rubyinstaller.org/downloads/){:target="_blank"}.
*	Close and restart terminal to update PATH Variables (otherwise the gem function is not available).
*	Delete old gem.lock files in */docs*
*	Install bundler from terminal: `gem install bundler` (path does not matter).
*	Close and restart terminal to update PATH Variables (otherwise the bundle function might not be available)
*	Install gems from terminal: `bundle install` (switch to /docs folder before)
*	Execute from terminal: `bundle exec jekyll serve` (switch to */docs* folder before)

### Frequent Error Messages
Problems with gem "webrick" to gemfile



<!--
## Further reading

(https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ruby_logo.svg )

add some day
-->
